 
4.9.1 Description of Courses

AML100 Engineering Mechanics
(3-1-0) 4 Credits
NLN100Kinematics, Statics, Equations of motion, Rigid body dynamics, Introduction to variational mechanics.
CSL100 Introduction to Computer Science
(3-0-2) 4 Credits
Concept of an algorithm; termination and correctness. Algorithms to programs: specification, top-down development and stepwise refinement. Iterative versus recursive style; problem solving using a functional style; correctness issues in programming; efficiency issues in programming; time and space measures. Structured style of imperative programming; assertions and loop invariants; programming in an imperative language using advanced features: procedures, functions. Data types, representational invariants. Encapsulation, abstractions,
16
 



interaction, modularity. Identifying and exploiting inherent concurrency.
CYL100 Introduction to Chemistry
(3-0-0) 3 Credits
Quantum mechanical principles of structure and bonding. Free energy and entropy changes in chemical processes. Phase diagram. Coordination chemistry. Bioinorganic chemistry. Organometallic chemistry. Materials of interest in chemistry. Stereochemistry. Reactivity of molecules. Strategies for carbon-carbon bond formation.
CYP100 Chemistry Laboratory
(0-0-4) 2 Credits
Experiments involve the following: Titrations, Surface Tension and Viscosity, Potentiometery, Conductometry, Preparation of metal complexes and important organic
 
First Year UG Course Schedule 2013-2014




 
compounds, Kinetics, Chromatography, Qualitative and quantitative estimation of organic compounds.
Special emphasis is laid on application of the theoretical knowledge that the students have learned before to practical use; the experiments have been so selected that the importance and utility of chemistry in our daily life is well reflected.

EEL100 Introduction to Electrical Engineering
(3-0-2) 4 Credits
Elements in an Electrical circuit: R, L, C, Diode, Voltage and current sources (independent and dependent / controlled sources with examples); DC circuits, KCL, KVL, Network theorems, Mesh and nodal analysis; Step response in RL, RC, RLC circuits; Phasor analysis of AC circuits; Single-phase and 3-phase circuits; Two port networks, BJT: CE and small signal model, Operational amplifiers: Model and applications; Introduction to Digital circuits; Magnetic circuits, Transformers: Modeling and analysis; parameter determination; Energy in magnetic field; Electromechanical energy conversion principles with examples; Principles of measurement of voltage, current and power.
Laboratory component and the List of experiments :
CRO (mechanism and usage); KCL, KVL, Network theorem verification; Step / transient response of RL, RC, RLC circuits; Steady state response of RLC circuits for sinusoidal excitation; Diode experiment (clipping, clamping and rectification); Basic circuits using opamp; Transformer OC and SC tests; BH loop in an iron core, DC and AC motor – for observation only; A small mini-project.
MAL100 Calculus
(3-1-0) 4 Credits
Review of Limit, Continuity and Differentiability, uniform continuity, Mean Value Theorems and applications, Taylor’s Theorem, maxima and minima, Sequences and series, limsup, liminf, convergence of sequences and series of real numbers, absolute and conditional convergence.
Reimann Integral, fundamental theorem of integral calculus, applications of definite integrals, improper integrals, beta and gamma functions.
Functions of several variables, limit and continuity, partial derivatives and differentiability, gradient, directional derivatives, chain rule, Taylor’s theorem, maxima and minima and method of Lagrange Multipliers.
Double and triple integration, Jacobian and change of variables formula. Parametrization of curves and surfaces, vector fields, divergence and curl, Line integrals, Green’s theorem, surface integral, Gauss and Stokes’ theorems with applications.
MAL101 Linear Algebra and Differential Equations
(3-1-0) 4 Credits
Vector Spaces over Q, R and C, subspaces, linear independence, linear span of a set of vectors, basis nad dimension of a vector space, sum and direct sum.
 
System of linear (homogeneous and non-homogeneous) equations, matrices and Gauss elimination, elementary row operations, row space, column space, null space and rank of a matrix.
Linear transformation, rank-nullity theorem and its applications, matrix representation of a linear transformation, changes of basis and similarity.
Eigen Values and eigenvectors, characteristic and minimal polynomials, Cayley-Hamilton theorem (without proof) and applications.
Review of first order differential equations, Picard’s theorem; linear dependence and Wronskian. Dimensionality of space of solutions, linear ODE with constant coefficients of second order and higher order, Cauchy-Euler Equations, Method of undetermined coefficients and method of variation of parameters. Boundary value problems: Sturm-Liouville eigen value problems. System of linear differential equations with constant coefficients, fundamental matrix, matrix methods. Power series and its convergence, power series method, Fourier Series, Laplace transform method.
MEP100 Introduction to Engineering Visualization
(.5-0-3) 2 Credits
Sketching of engineering objects and interpretation of drawings as a visualisation and communication tool. Creating 3D components through the use of a CAD package. Generation of drawings from CAD package. Simple assemblies, generation of assembly views from part drawings, animation of simple assemblies.
MEP101 Product Realization by Manufacturing
(0-0-4) 2 Credits
Exposing role of manufacturing processes in product realization; Understanding product realization by hands on activities; Experience of product realization by undertaking manufactung exercises and assembly activity in teams.
PHL100 Electromagnetic Waves and Quantum Mechanics
(3-0-0) 3 credits
Electric and magnetic field vectors in a medium, Susceptibility and Conductivity, Maxwell’s equations, Boundary conditions; EM wave equation, Plane wave solutions, Polarization of the EM waves, Poynting vector and intensity of the EM wave; Wave packet, Phase and Group velocities; Reflection and refraction of EM waves at a dielectric interface; Brewster angle; Total internal reflection at a dielectric interface; EM waves in a conducting medium and plasma; Wave-particle duality, de- Broglie waves; Quantum mechanical operators; Schroedinger equation, Wave function, Statistical interpretation, Superposition Principle, Continuity Equation for probability density; Stationary states, Bound states, Free-particle solution, 1-D infinite potential well, Expectation values and uncertainty relations; 1-D finite potential well, Quantum mechanical tunneling and alpha- decay, Kronig-Penny model and emergence of bands.


17
 
First Year UG Course Schedule 2013-2014




 
PHP100 Physics Laboratory
(0-0-4) 2 credits
Experiments based on Design & Study of Power sourses, Charging & Discharging of a capacitor, Electromagnetic Induction, Phase measurement.
Experiments on geometrical and wave optics including interference, diffraction, dispersion and polarization.
 
Experiments based on mechanics, heat, sound, fluids, resonance, like linear air track, coupled pendulum and oscillators, thermal conductivity, elasticity.
Experiments in the area of modern physics, like Planck’s constant, Lasers, semiconductor band gap, wave motion, mechanical transmission line.
 
